>> Francesca Sadikin: So, now we're
shifting into handling common project
execution problems.
So, let's look at this scenario.
Near the deadline, I let my manager
know I am not going to finish the task,
and it took another month to finish it.
So what would you do in the scenario?
What would you do differently?
>> Speaker 2: You could ask for
any other help from the team.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Yes.
>> Speaker 2: Anybody,
any other domain experts in the company.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Asking for
help, yep.
>> Speaker 3: Yea, I just think it's
important to communicate any blockers with
your team so that you can get
unblocked as quickly as possible?
>> Francesca Sadikin: Yes,
communicate blockers.
>> Speaker 4: Explain the complexities
of why it could take longer.
>> Speaker 4: One person said this is
the part that scares me, giving timelines.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Okay, yes.
You guys are all correct, but I find that
when engineers are in this position,
it's often, this is very common
because they didn't know
they weren't going to finish it
until it was too late, right?
And so there's actually several
pieces that leads into this problem.
First is just that the belief that
the task that you're working on is a fixed
entity.
Like, you didn't realize that there is
flexibility sometimes in the deadlines,
the scope, and the priorities,
which changes with new insights and
new information.
Second, like I mentioned,
estimation is a problem.
Many engineers feel like they're on
track until it's too late to adjust and
they're estimating
the complexities involved.
And then, like others mentioned,
communication.
Communication is very, very important.
Keeping regular updates to stakeholders
informed helps you uncover
potential issues early, allowing for
timely support and course corrections.
And compounding all of this is
impostor syndrome which is experienced
by many engineers which makes it harder
to communicate that you are struggling.
So, how do we navigate all
of these issues effectively?
So we're going to focus on
gathering more information,
embracing over-communication,
and then also estimations skills.
Okay, so estimation,
engineers have a higher chance of missing
deadlines if they're still
developing their estimation skills.
By the way, estimation is very hard.
Lots of engineers,
super experienced engineers,
get it wrong all the time, but
there are tactics to help.
One of the ones that I really
like is to use a spike.
So, let's say that you have this task.
You have requirements 1, 2 and 3.
There's a testing phase and a deployment.
>> Francesca Sadikin: A lot of engineers,
if they do a waterfall approach
to these tasks, it's very risky.
So what this would look like is like, they
see it as like a checklist, they're like,
okay, requirement 1, complete that, go
move on to requirement 2, complete that.
Now, the problem is that if requirement
3 was actually really, really difficult.
You would not have known until it was too
late that you didn't have enough time and
you needed more support, right?
It's like you didn't know.
It's the unknown, unknowns,
you didn't know until it was too late.
So, if you use a spike.
So, a spike is essentially,
this is an agile term, I think, and
there are other terms that
kind of paints this process.
But you would kind of take maybe a few
hours, a day or two, depending on how
complex this work is, and what you would
do is take every single piece of it.
All three requirements,
the testing, the deployment,
and in that timeframe,
you would go into each one upfront.
That would look maybe like
starting to look into the code,
starting to write a little bit of a code,
looking to see what would it take for
you to do this work.
And by doing this upfront, you are
starting to figure out very quickly like,
is this task exactly what I was expecting?
Or like, I don't actually
know what's going on here and
I should spend more time.
And so
this allows you to plan your work better.
You can see this diagram here,
where, okay, requirement 1.
I know how to do that.
But requirements 2 and 3.
Actually, this was actually a lot
more complicated than I thought.
I need to make sure that I'm planning for
that work earlier, right?
I'm starting to ask more
questions about it beforehand.
Realizing that testing, it's gonna
be too hard to do it all at the end,
we should really be doing it all,
all throughout this process, and
then we end with deployment.
>> Francesca Sadikin: So, this just allows
you to solve some of those unknowns
earlier on and
allows you to plan your work better.
>> Francesca Sadikin: The other
small tips that I have,
is to practice breaking tasks down now.
So especially if you haven't started
working in a corporate setting.
When you are doing a task, guess how
long it was going to take you and
then compare it to how
long it actually took.
You're starting to develop an internal
sense for how long you actually
take when you know what to do and
when you don't know what to do.
Last, remember,
understand how long it takes to actually
get to completion in your company process.
Completion doesn't mean code complete.
It has to go through all
of these other phases and
you need to incorporate that
into your estimation, right?
So, for example, does the PR review take,
like, a few days a week or two?
Does getting to testing staging production
environments also take a few days?
Because, like, I don't know,
some different processes in different
companies are always different.
And does deployment,
is it instantaneous, or
does the company only deploy once a week?
You want to understand all of
those additional time frames and
make sure that when you're done, you've
took into consideration all of this.
Over-communicate.
So, as I mentioned before,
communicating is super duper important to
give you more flexibility
if there is a problem.
Things you want to be communicating.
What has been done?
What is currently in progress?
What are blockers?
Even just like a hint of a blocker,
you want to communicate that and
potential solutions for that blocker.
You wanna talk about what's at
risk of not being delivered.
You should be talking about all of this
to your manager, to teammates working
on this task with you, and then any
stakeholders relying on this work.
This last one is, if your manager and your
other teammates weren't communicating this
out to the stakeholders, maybe you should
be responsible for doing that as well.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Lastly,
gathering information.
Gathering more information about
the task provides flexibility
when obstacles are hit, right?
Cuz you might find that
the requirements on a ticket,
someone just wrote that, but
it can change sometimes.
You wanna figure out what
exactly is this task.
Most tickets are not very detailed, and
so it's up to you to actually understand
what it's trying to ask for, what are the
edge conditions that you want to handle.
What are the validation steps to determine
that this task is correct and done, right?
Does that mean that
someone needs to check it.
And when it's deployed in front of users
and confirm that, yes, that's working now.
Who are all the stakeholders
to sign off on that work?
Who is relying on this work?
A lot of your work doesn't
happen in isolation.
Usually, there is a pipeline and
other people are probably relying on this.
Why does this work matter, right?
What's the importance to your team,
to the people relying on it,
to the business, and then,
when is it needed, really?
So, like to give you an example
of how this plays out.
We're gonna take this task again.
We have requirements 1, 2, and 3,
we have a testing piece and a deployment.
The initial deadline on this
ticket was a month, right?
In your investigation, you find out that,
well, there is a team that needs it,
but they only need requirement 2,
and they only need that in a month.
So, keeping that in mind,
if you run into problems,
you can use that information
to adjust the scope, right?
So instead of trying to
deliver everything at once and
missing like the whole thing altogether.
You can talk to the stakeholders
to see like, hey,
is it okay if I just deliver what you
asked for requirement 2 in that one month.
And I can push off requirements 1 and
3 to be delivered after because
it's not as critical for you.
So, this is just like a little
example of what it looks like.
Like the flexibility that you can have,
and the adjustments that can be made,
if you just had more information
about what this task actually is.
>> Francesca Sadikin: So,
if we revisit that old scenario,
given all this new skill, and mindsets.
We can change this situation and say I
proactively worked with my manager and
stakeholders to arrive on a revised scope
that allowed me to complete on time and
still deliver what was needed.